# The End of my Four Year Dungeons & Dragons Campaign

We did it. We finished a _four year_ Dungeons & Dragons campaign. 

This was my first long-term experience with Dungeons & Dragons. I had played a few one-shot games here and there over the years but never really got into it. Then, like many have done since the rise of [Twitch.tv](https://twitch.tv) in the last 10 years, I was introduced to [Critical Role](https://critrole.com/) and decided to give it another chance. 

### When it all started
My roommate at the time had another friend from work who had much more experience with the game, playing 2nd Edition, 3rd, and 3.5 pretty heavily. We decided to pull together with a couple he knew, and got a party of four plus a DM to play 2nd Edition. I decided to roll a Cleric, and try my hand at a more support-y character. 

We ran a short dungeon-crawl, murder hobo'd out, and had tons of fun. After that first, short campaign we tried a couple of others however, like countless groups before us, the party fell apart. I had another set of friends that were still interested in playing, though. This time, I wanted to dive into 5th Edition, and play the game I've been watching Mercer and company crushing on Twitch. I picked up the Dungeon Master's Guide, Player's Handbook, and Monster Manual, and started writting my first campaign. 

### The Good, the bad, and the inspiration
When I started writting the first drafts of my campaign (the lore, the world, ect.), I bought a couple of leather-bound journals to write everything in. They were filled with hand-drawn maps, diagrams, and NPC stat blocks. After a while these books fell away, and I traded them out for digital notes. The origional party were five. My best friend, his wife, sister-in-law, and brother, and a mutual friend of ours. I was stoked, and ready for a grand adventure.

After the frist hand full of sessions, the party, again, began to dwindle. Our friend stopped showing up, and my besty's sister-in-law dropped out as well. Then there were three. With the loss of two of my party's companions, I was left a bit demoralized for a while. At the time, I was going through a pretty deep, personal depression after a bad relationship, and my writting started to drop off. It started to become apparent to the party, too. We stuck with it, however. After a few months of sparse sessions and mediocre writting, I touched base with a friend from work who was in the 2nd Edition campaigns, and he agreed to join my 5E adventure. 

We invited him out to hang out with the rest of the gang so we could all get to know eachother a bit better, and after the rest of the party's approval, he joined a session with us. Given his prior experience with TTRPGs (and more specifically D&D), he was already comfortable role-playing his character (even doing the voices!), and engaging with the game. His character and interest in the game renewed my own motivation to start putting more effort into my writting again, and helped stave off my ever-worsening mental health. After a while, we got a 5th to joine again, another mutual work friend who had been looking for a D&D group for a while.

I had a creative "renaissance", diving deeper into the lore of the world I had created, and even starting an online campaign on the side for some friends I had been gaming with (including my friend from the irl campaign). Of course, the online campaign didn't last long either; we made it about 5 sessions in before one of the players started cancelling every week. However, there was an interesting item that came from the failed online game; one of the party members in my live group wasn't feeling very attached to their character anymore, and wanted to re-roll. We had collaborated a means to kill off his current Rogue, and introduce the character he rolled in the online campaign (which took place in the same universe, in a different time period). And it all fell together.

### The Journey
The party now only contained one PC that had seen the first session. We lost one more player (my friend's wife dropped after the other two new players joined, as she wasn't feeling the game anymore), but the remaining four stayed. I was able to focus on integrating these characters into the world, and flushing out their back stories. My campaign was very character driven. The focus was not so much on the lore, as it was how my NPCs and PCs interacted with it, and their motivations and personalities. We worked through four major story arcs, killed Hags, survived invasions, delved into the Underdark, liberated the long-lost home of our Dwarven PC, and even had one character awaken and harness an ancient divine power. It was a rollercoaster. 

The big bad was a Lich, who had stolen Orcus' Wand, and wanted to return the universe to an ancient, otherworldly being. This villan was, in his past life, before lichdom, the best friend of one of the PCs. Another character had aspirations of her own to ascend to lichdom, and had been using the others to gain access to Orcus' Wand and defeat the big bad. After an epic push on the necropolis the lich inhabited, and a three-part encounter that took _three (3) whole four-hour sessions_ to complete, they had done it, and defeated not only the lich, but a Revenant (long story), three Frost Giant Zombies, and an ancient black dragon. What's even more ridiculous, is they were level 11 when they did this. There was some NPC help, but still. After all of that, the last moments of the campaign were by far the best. 

### The End
After defeating all the crazy shit I threw at them, their goals were no longer alligned, and there was a fight between the aspiring Lich Wizard, and the rest of the party, which consisted of a Monk, Articifer, Cleric, and Ranger (oh, there was a 5th who joined us late in the campaign). After a swift fight, the Wizard came into posession of the wand, and Dimension Door'd out of the fight, escaping with the wand. 

After this encounter, we went through each character who survived, and talked about what their veteran characters would be doing after the epic conclusion. There were still some loose holes, but that's ok, they'll make for fantastic one-shots later on ;) We then got to the betrayer. If you're familiar with Orcus' Wand in the DMG, then you know that there's a very high risk to trying to attune to this thing; you must succeed a DC 17(!) CON save to use it. If you fail, you die instantly, and are then raised as a zombie.

Our anti-hero failed. Deep underground, somewhere hidden in the Underdark, lies her animated corpse, and a lot of sweet loot. Another great idea for a one-shot, huh? 

### How D&D Saved My Life
This header is a bit dramatic. I don't believe my life was at any real risk, although how could I know that? The point I want to make is this: Dungeons & Dragons gave me something to look forward to when I was at one of the lowest points in my life. It allowed me to flex a creative muscle I haven't used since I was a child. It gave me an escape from my otherwise mundane life (at the time), and it showed me a whole new world of community and endless entertainment. 

I haven't had a more consistant group of friends in my adult life. We've grown pretty close over the last four years. We played D&D online during the hight of the pandemic. We've put together one-shots and played new characters. We have consisten social lives, and the only thing I can think about since the end of that epic, years-long campaign is what I'm going to be doing for the next one.

### What now.
I'll be taking a break from DMing for a bit while I write up a new campaign (there will be a wiki, and yes, it will be available online under the creative commons license) and we take a trip through some classic modules we found online, and continue another campaign we've been running since the beginning (I'm playing in this one). Now that I have a decent amount of DMing experience under my belt, I'm confident the next campaign will be more consistant, entertaining, and a hell of a lot more fun. I'm stoked.
